# QUANT


{part/THREE/MANIFOLDWISE/Some things do through our judgment pass \\
As through a multiplying glass. \\
And sometimes, if the object be too far, \\
We take a falling meteor for a star./“Ode: Of Wit,” Abraham Cowley (1618-1667)}



{chapter/16}



Hunger woke me, finally rising to the top of my list of needs.

Getting back on top of the cylinder had been a problem of broken physics. We couldn't just climb back up, because there was nothing heavy enough to grip. Maybe a master climber could have started from the bottom of a giant tube of carpet and made his way to the top, but even for Niko climbing had only ever been a fleeting hobby.

I'd managed to pull myself up to the top of the rope on the last of my shredded muscles and shove my arms into the gap between the bed and the floor, dangling by my armpits. Niko, farther up, worked out a plan. I wasn't too coherent, but I gather he carefully scoped out a route from one piece of furniture to the next, and then, in what would have been the most viral parkour video ever if Youtube had been invented, leapt from one to the other, pushing off each one as his weight lifted it off the ground, till gasping, he scrabbled up to the top of the tube.

From there it was simply a matter of detaching the chandelier net from its anchor point at the base of the hallway floating above us.

I never would have thought of this. But Niko figured all those glass baubles together ought to weigh more than we did. That the chandelier-web, part of the Confusion, should follow its own gravitational rules, not the ones that dragged us downwards. Like a cloth thrown over a crystal ball, the detached net would wrap around the curvature of the bedroom tube, with both of us inside but not heavy enough to pull it free. We'd be able to crawl back around to the top, ants between the cloth and the glass.

It worked. There must have been some complicated gymnastics up there, and I'm fuzzy on how he got the net loose---maybe he had his own serrated knife---but it worked. Back on top, the net of glass now a glittering ceiling over the bedroom furniture like the world's most fabulous couch fort, I thought nothing in the world had ever felt so good as lying on my back on a floor, every muscle gloriously unclenched.

Wedged in between two dressers, so as not to roll off the edge, we slept. His idea.

When we woke we ate power bars from Niko's pack: my own had gotten lost somewhere in the fight, probably sliding off the curve and down into the darkness below. I had no idea where to go from here---although it seemed like there were only two options, one way down the tube or the other---but Niko had found a better option while he'd been scrambling around up top. Directly under the invisible anchor point of the densest part of the web, the chandelier itself, was a trapdoor. It opened downward with a creak when you pushed on it, releasing fold-up stairs like the ones that sometimes climb into attics. The stairs descended some fifteen feet to a cement floor bisecting the cylinder. Its upper half was a domed tunnel, vanishing into the distance in either direction. Bare bulbs hung from the roof every fifty feet or so, leaking dim puddles of yellow-orange glow. Water ran down the center in a foot-deep trench, fast enough to gurgle.

Niko thought we should head upstream, follow the water to its source. Too worn down to argue, I agreed. 

Keeping to the level ground on either side of the trench, we started trudging.

We moved slowly. Niko had cleaned up the cut in my lower leg as best he could, surprisingly tender, bandaging it with some socks from a dresser drawer and a tight-wrapped bungee cord from his pack. But it hurt, a lot. I hobbled more than walked, had to stop for frequent breaks, or lean on him for support. He helped me without comment, when I needed it.

I couldn't help notice, especially up close to him like that: he seemed to have all his fingers.

Unsaid things festered between us.

The tunnel had no perceptible slope, but the water in the trench ran fast, rushing eagerly ahead. The path curved gently left, then gently right. We walked for what felt like a long time.

Gradually, the perfect curve of the ceiling began to straighten. The ceiling got flatter, the top of the wall's curve more sharp, until it squared off entirely. At the same time the tunnel gradually shrunk back to house-sized dimensions. Presently we were walking down a rectangular hall of concrete, like some forgotten subbasement in a shuttered factory. It felt like we were back “inside” again. The sensation of being inside a pipe suspended over empty space had slowly receded, and now we felt once again embedded in earth. 

There were no side doors, no other trapdoors up. There were no decisions to make. We just walked. Other than an occasional grunt or word of coordination, we didn't talk. I sometimes saw him looking at me, out of the corner of my eye, but I couldn’t look back. A small part of me wanted to ask a million questions. Another part didn't want the answers. There was a tautness between us, a strain, like a handshake stripped down to bone and gristle, rubbing, raw. I realized maybe it had been there a long time, underneath everything we'd each wrapped around it.

Mostly we were just too tired for talking.

Up ahead, the tunnel opened into a larger room. After a few more minutes of trudging we reached it.

It was a vaulted brick antechamber, maybe thirty feet across and hexagonal, with tunnels coming in from all six sides. Each seemed identical to the one we'd entered from. Water flooded the sunken floor of the room and ran out the trenches in the center of each tunnel. 

In the center of the room, under the water, was a rounded concrete pillar with a large metal hatchway topped with a wheel, like something you'd see on a submarine.

I knew before checking that the hatch would have a keyhole.

Once we confirmed it did, we were strangely hesitant, as if we'd lost our momentum. We perched on the lip of a tunnel, dangling our feet in the water, using the excuse that we needed a rest.

There was so much I should be asking him, so much I should be saying, but I couldn't find a way to start.

Well. I had pretended nothing was wrong for such a long time. Maybe another few minutes wouldn't hurt.

{section_break}

The rippling sounds of the water were peaceful, and I didn't want to break the silence. But someone had to.

“So.” The sound bounced off the vaulted brick above us. I coughed. “We've come all this way. We going through, or what?”

The words seemed to shake him out of a daze, and he perked up, flashing a huge grin. “Hell yeah! Let's do it. Let’s go home.”

We waded over to the hatchway. The wheel and lock were just under the surface of the water. I pulled the key from my pocket and slipped it into the lock, and it went in smoothly. I spun it through a full turn till it made a tiny {i/chunk}, then turned the wheel. After spinning it around, something gave, and we found we could swing the circular hatch open along one hinged side.

We held our glowsticks underwater near the opening. The hatch opened into an ordinary-looking but flooded room beneath us with a yellow-tiled floor. Chrome and porcelain rippled up at us. We realized after a moment it was a flooded bathroom.

“The other guys are probably doing the same thing on their side,” Niko said hopefully. “Maybe we'll swim through at exactly the same time, go past each other.”

“You really think we're still in sync? After everything that's happened? Our doubles just defeated their own evil Niko with exactly the same strategy and ended up here at precisely the same time as us?”

He shrugged lightly. “Might as well believe that. Because if we don't, and, uh, there's no way back… that would kind of suck.”

“We don't even know if this goes anywhere,” I said. “For all we know, there's a mile of flooded tunnel down there before it mirrors back to our world, if it ever does. You know what would suck more? Drowning.”

“Good point.” He nodded. “Fine. I'll scout ahead.” He pulled off his shirt and started kicking off his shoes.

I blinked, alarmed. “Hey, I didn't mean for you to---”

“It's fine. If it goes on too far, I'll come back. But the distance between the two fridge doors was like six feet, right? No reason to think these two sides should be much more than that.”

“If you're cool with it,” I said, uncertain, not wanting to be separated from him. “You want me to come with you?”

“Nah, I'll be quicker if I'm not tripping over your shrimpy ass all the time. Toss me a light?” He'd stripped down to his jeans. I handed him another glowstick from the pack, and he cracked it open, gripping it between his teeth.

“Brck inner mernert,” he grunted, and before I could stop him, lifted his legs over the lip of the porthole and plunged down into the water.

I was ready for a long, anxious countdown and possibly nerve-jangling decisions about when I should start after him, but in almost no time he broke the surface again, pulling himself up through the circular opening and spitting out the glowstick.

“Like I thought,” he said, brushing water off his arms. “There's even a guide rope showing the way. Out the door and through another room and there's a pair of sliding glass doors, with an identical room on the other side. Easy. I made it to the door and back with plenty of air, so it should be no problem to get through to the other side.”

I swallowed. “And, did you see another Niko, at the other glass door? Swimming up to scout ahead from his side?”

He looked surprised, but then nodded. “Oh yeah, right. I mean there wasn't a lot of light. I think maybe I could have seen someone, yeah. Hard to tell. But it's all good, there’ll be plenty of room to squeeze by.”

I must have looked skeptical, because he laughed. “Okay, probably just a reflection. I'm not a hundred percent. But only one way to find out, yeah?”

“What, right now?” I said, strangely unsettled.

“Might as well get it over with.” He flicked some water from his ear. “Come on in, buddy. Water’s fine.”

Something was wrong again. The dark circle of the submerged porthole was ominously black. Unknown. This was happening way too fast. “I don’t know. Shit. What if something happens down there? What if one of us gets stuck, or needs help? We could fucking {i/drown}.” My mind was racing. It felt like riding a bike that kept slipping gears, nothing quite fitting together, accelerating down a hill with less and less control, no way to stop it.

“Just get it over with,” Niko said brightly. “The sooner we go through, the sooner we'll be home.”

“How did you even know this was here?” My throat tightened. His eyes widened. “No. I can't do this again. Why won't any of you be honest with me? Stop it. I know. {i/I know.} You're not... you're not really...”

Somewhere far below us, something {i/groaned}, low, immense. The ground quivered, like a subterranean mountain turning over in its sleep, and the surface of the water pinched and jittered in sympathy. And just as this happened Niko reached up, eyes wide, and touched two fingers to my lips. Made a zipping motion across them. I was shocked into silence by it all: the sound, the absurdity of the gesture, his fingers on my lips. The fear on his face.

“Don't,” he said, quiet. “Please.”

We both took a breath.

“You have to trust me, Orion. Everything will work out for us. Everything. But you have to {i/trust me}, now, here, about this if nothing else.”

The rumbling receded. The water smoothed out.

He took another breath, seemed to notice his fingers were still touching my lips, pulled them back. Stared at them.

And as his eyes flicked back to mine I saw something there I’d never seen, no matter how much I’d wanted to, except in dreams. Something hot and desperate, yearning, vulnerable. Something that rippled in the space between us, flickered and grew, a mass, almost a shape.

And I understood.

The finger, lying cold on the carpet inches from my eye, the whorled texture of his fingerprints.

{i/I’ll hunt that bitch down, and kill him. Again.}

How easily he’d found the trapdoor, led us straight here to the way back through. How sure he was about what I’d find on the other side.

And the way he’d fought for me. The way he’d been looking at me.

He wasn’t my Niko.

The ground groaned again beneath us, more dangerous this time. A brick fell from somewhere above, made a splash loud enough to make us both flinch. But we didn’t break eye contact.

“Don’t say it,” he breathed.

Synchronicity.

I felt like we were balanced on an impossibly heavy pivot, a mountain peak turned upside down. If we leaned too far in any direction…

Two soap bubbles, pressed together, floating in a vast empty void. Trembling.

Somehow we were closer than we’d been a moment before. The curves of his jaw, his cheek, were aches inside me, blood-memorized, bone-familiar. 

The air around us held its breath. Where the water touched my knees, it thrummed.

His lips were so close to mine. It would be so easy. It would last forever, like dying winter sunlight slanting into a room through melting icicles, lighting it up, setting fire to neurons as the ones that had always struggled to keep fantasy and reality separate fused together, every universe fading away like stage lights until the spotlight of that kiss would be the only thing left. The possible I’d always wanted made real, at last.

“I want to,” I breathed.

“Then do it.” The need in his eyes was almost too bright to bear.

I shook my head. “Not that. I want to trust you.”

He blinked. “Then do that.” But I pulled back, biting my lip, and his brow creased with worry. “Can’t you?”

I wanted to laugh. {i/Trust?} Could we {i/trust} each other? The question unraveled into a million strands, tendrils stretching back through everything that had happened down here, and everything that had happened before that, back to the first time we met and much, much earlier. Trust. What a beautiful, fucked-up, irrational concept. 

He kept his gaze locked on mine.

I tried to see him. Really see him. I willed the layers of muck and confusion between us to pull back, to clear away and reveal someone I could, at last, understand. The Niko who forgave me. The Niko I’d hurt. The Nikos I’d saved, damned, slept with; the ones who needed me, who hated me, who wanted me dead. And the one I’d tried so hard to find, had looked everywhere for, down here and up there: the one who this whole time had secretly, desperately, impossibly… and with each story I felt myself yearning to slip into that universe, that narrative, slot neat like gears into alignment, into {i/trust}. Into a reassurance that I finally understood where I was and where I belonged and who belonged to me, and didn’t have to be lost and afraid any more, alone in a dark bedroom with no one who loved me to tuck me in. 

But people don’t wrap up like that, into nice little cages, contained. And I saw with a sudden painful lucidity that I was wrong, again. He wasn’t the Niko I wanted. None of them had been, even if this one maybe thought he could be, was as deluded as I’d been. But we’d mistaken shadows for substance, all of us, chased them and failed, of course, to grab them, and become shadows ourselves in failing. But we weren’t shadows. We were more than that. We deserved more.

Something swayed inside me, as if I’d let go of one handhold and gripped another, shifting my weight even though I wasn't sure the new grip would hold. But by then I'd already done it, already committed. And it held. It didn’t let me fall.

“I’m going through.” I took a deep breath. “But it’s not because I trust you.” He looked alarmed but I raised a hand. “It’s okay. Let me finish. I’m going through because I’m here, and I’ve got a key, and there’s this door. And I made Tiger Shark in swim club and I can hold my breath for three minutes and I can make it, I can make it through. But Niko, you can’t come with me.” Tears sprung like pinpricks to my eyes, but I blinked them back, fierce. “You {i/can’t come with me}.”

“Bullshit,” he said, stepping forward, even though I could see he knew I was right, see it in how his faced creased with desperate sadness. “I belong with you. Your double, on the other side…” An ominous crack sounded from somewhere above us, but he pressed on. “He doesn’t feel the same way about me. I don’t {i/belong} with him.” 

The ground dropped out from under us, like a plane hitting turbulence. Rumbles quivered in stone far below.

“Niko, stop,” I said, afraid to look away, to even glance at the walls around us, as if they could read the truth in our eyes. “You can’t come through. You know why you can’t.”

“I can live with pain,” he said, reaching out for me; but I must have looked shocked, because his expression changed to placating alarm. “No, it’s okay. They’re just headaches. It’d be worth it. You’re worth it.”

“I’m not.” I shook my head, angry, never more certain of anything. “You think I could live with myself, putting you through that each day?”

“Everything will be all right,” he pleaded, ignoring me. “It’ll be fine, it’ll all be fine, just let me come through. Let me try. {i/Let me try.}”

And I couldn’t bear to see that need in his face, reflected back at me at last after all this time, and wondered if he’d seen it too, how sad and jagged and pathetic and painful it was, and how the way I’d hidden it for so long had only made it more of all those things, and I couldn’t stand hurting him anymore, and then the words came to me that we should have said to each other before, not that any words could fill the gaps inside us but these were the ones I had and they were better than nothing, so I said them: “I’m not the only one who can love you.”

He stopped dead, face draining of color. 

The surface of the water twitched, rippled. Waiting.

I took a long, ragged breath and slowly realized it was true.

Finally he licked his lips, broke our gaze. Looked down at the water like he’d dropped something, sad and resigned as it sunk away for good.

“Guess, from your perspective,” he said carefully, “that should have been my line.”

“Yeah, well.” I waved my hand at the architecture around us. “Life’s got a funny way of fucking everything up.”

He laughed, sudden and loud, and even if things weren’t right, even if the edge between us was jagged and always would be, it was good to hear that laugh again.

We breathed. It was settled.

“So,” he said finally. “You’ll swim through. Pass your other.” He swallowed; I nodded. {i/Just my other. Not his.} “And then we’ll each be where we should be.” His face hardened into a mask as he said this, grim and colorless. Then he looked at me, the corner of his mouth twisting in pain but also a challenge, flinging some of the pain back: “You’ll be fine without me, I guess. Yeah?”

It did hurt, like he knew it would. Well. At least we were saying truths to each other. Not quite the same as trust, but a good start. 

I stripped down to just my jeans, self-conscious, but Niko was spinning a theory about the identical set of clothes I'd find on the other side. If alter-me was swimming through too, he should have had this same thought, and we'd both have dry shirts and shoes waiting, and wasn't that excellent?

I wasn't really processing this, still overwhelmed. Trust. Pairs of universes, pulling apart. Drowning, death. Dry clothes seemed like insubstantial details. I tied the glow stick to my belt loop, emptied my pockets of everything non-essential.

“Oh hey,” he said as I did this, affecting it as a casual afterthought, “I want you to take something through for me.” He pulled a plastic bag from his pocket, folded-up pages with something written on them inside. “Hold onto it for a while, okay? Just till you get back through.”

“Sure.” I took the bag. “I suppose I shouldn't read it until---?” A faint judder rippled through the ground; the water danced in interference patterns for an instant.

He looked pained. “Please, please don't.” Glancing around, he took a deep breath. “Okay. You ready?”

I wasn't, so I stepped forward and hugged him, fierce as the roiling lump in my throat.

His bare skin, still damp, felt hot against my own. He held me tight, wet curls rubbing against my face. Heat passed between us, but it was the least of what had.

We'd loved each other, at times. Even if the people we'd loved were mostly in our heads.

It was nice, but his curls were tickling my nose, and I pulled back before I meant to, reflecting his surprise at this with embarrassment. For a second it looked like he thought I was going to kiss him, and then I thought maybe he was thinking of kissing me, and we both stood uncertain for a second or two before dropping arms and stepping back.

Awkward. But sort of perfect for the mismatched shape of us, which was, if nothing else, our own.

“Are you going to be okay?” he asked, without spite this time.

I didn't know how to answer, because despite these tidy revelations, the thought of never seeing him again still stabbed at something deep inside me, and maybe always would; and the idea that anyone in this or any world would ever know me as well as he did seemed impossible. But I nodded. Eventually, maybe, it would be true.

“How about you?” 

He grinned. “I don't plan to spend a couple decades sulking down here like that asshole, if that's what you mean.” He looked up at the arched roof above us, scanning the bricks like trying to find constellations in them. “I’ve never known what I wanted, man. Just what everybody else wants me to want. I’m sorry I mixed you up in all that.” He shrugged, lightly. “Guess I should figure that out, yeah? Spend some time with myself. Maybe more solo camping, you know? Wandering in the wilderness. Worked for Jesus.”

“Sure,” I said. “You see that wolf again up there, man… you fucking wreck it.”

We grinned at each other, one last time, or maybe for the first time, depending on how you looked at it: and then I turned away, toward the submerged portal, the way out, the way home. I stared down at it.

The thought of swimming into that hole without knowing the way to the other side stabbed a different part of me, the one concerned with oxygen and continued existence. I pushed the fear down but it kept manufacturing images for me: jeans snagging on hidden nails that held me back while I flailed uselessly; huge dead fish swimming the flooded halls with flaking gray skin, bulging eyes growing larger and larger as they closed on me. I imagined drowning. Breathing water instead of air. Spasms of lungs. Knowing you were about to die, only not soon enough. Not nearly soon enough.

I took a deep breath, then another. I tried to slow my heartbeat. I didn't look at Niko.

Another breath. {i/Breathe.} Deeper and deeper.

I stared at the circular opening, visualized the motions I'd make. I tried to believe I could do this. I tried to push down the sliver of doubt lodged somewhere in my throat.

Gripping the sides of the hatch, I paused. I wasn't ready. But if I waited any longer, I'd never be.

“Later, skater,” I said, not looking back, then took one last huge breath and dove headfirst into the hatch.

